---
title: Deciding Testing Roles
linktitle: Deciding Testing Roles
summary: Playing the part
date: 2022-08-30
type: book
weight: 4
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
image:
  caption: ''
  focal_point: ''
  preview_only: no
---

If you are testing on your own or with a colleague, it is crucial to
**stick to your role**. If you are testing on your own, it might be
necessary that you switch between modes - but you need to do it
strategically and following a pre-defined script as much as possible.

When testing with infants or children (i.e., participants who do not
necessarily follow your instructions), we may identify two main roles:

## Tester 1, the technical lead

Tester 1 is going to do the capping, the gelling, and operating the
computer, the recording software and scripts.

Tester 1 should always keep a bit on the background, keeping one step
behind Tester 2 when greeting, doing things like going through the
consent form and talking with the parent, so that the child does not
focus too much on them and get to know and trust Tester 2. 

## Tester 2, the child support

Tester 2 is going to play, sit next to the child and interact with them
for most of the time. 

When the family arrives, Tester 2 is going to greet the child first, and
engage with them directly. When entering the testing room, Tester 2
starts playing with the child, and will keep soothing and distracting
for the whole sessions (including capping and recording). Unless there
is urgent necessity, Tester 2 should **never** leave the child's side to
sort things out with the equipment and/or computer.

## Testing alone

When testing on your own, you should adopts each role in different
stages of the testing session: Tester 2 when the family arrives and
during acclimatisation, Tester 1 during capping and recording. When the
program/scripts are running and/or are automated, it is possible to:

\(a\) to return to the child's side as Tester 2, but limiting the level
of engagement

\(b\) pause the program/script to momentarily engage with the child
during a break; during a break, you can give the child a reward, e.g., a
sticker

\(c\) provide brief bouts of vocal encouragement but not coming into the
child's view, for example, from behind a screen or a curtain

## Testing in a couple

If two people are testing, you should decide in advance who is going to
play tester 1/2.

In my experience, when testing in couple, it works best to alternate,
because both roles have their own challenges, and variety helps to
release anxiety. Furthermore, when you play the part of Tester 1/2, you
get the chance of observing your colleague at work and learn from them,
or provide them feedback based on your direct experience of the same
task. However, it is also possible to alway stick to one role, for
example if a tester has issues with mobility or vision that do not allow
specific activities, such as sitting on the ground or attending a laptop
screen. However, deciding the roles should never be based on confidence,
anxiety or personal inclination (except for the first few sessions
maybe): successfully delivering both the participant and technical side
are essential skills for research, that every trainee should fully
understand and apply.

Testing in more than 2 people might be disruptive for a child, but a
third person could be present as sole observer in the background.
