---
title: Preparing for the Testing Session
linktitle: Testing Preparations
summary: The quiet before the testing
date: 2022-05-09
type: book
weight: 2
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
image:
  caption: ''
  focal_point: ''
  preview_only: no
---

## You need to be calm.

**Feeling anxious before a testing session is completely normal**,
especially if you are new to this. Most people get nervous when they
have to handle small children that are not their own. However, anxiety
decreases concentration, thus increasing the chances of technical
errors, and contributes to creating a tense environment that will
negatively affect the experience of parent and child.

Therefore, **you need to be honest regarding your feelings** before and
during the testing session and work on them, starting from these three
pillars:

1.  [There is no way you can harm the child](#nobody-hurts)

2.  [If the child cries, it is not out of pain, but because they are not
    having it in their own way](#no-eeg-no-cry)

3.  [There is only one way to achieve that the child does not reject the
    equipment: they must forget about the
    equipment](#the-first-rule-about-eeg-club-is-you-do-not-talk-about-eeg-club)

### Nobody hurts

We are nervous around small children because they look frail and
defenseless, and we are afraid of hurting them. However, there is no way
that you or the EEG can hurt the child: caps are stretchy and made of
soft material that has been designed especially for children. For
example, the ENOBIO cap that I often use is made of the same fabric of
swim suits and does not pull the skin.

**Gel:** Many systems use water as conductive, but even if they use gel,
the gel is water-soluble, and cannot react with the skin. If you need a
syringe to insert the gel in the electrodes, use a blunt plastic tip
that is absolutely inoffensive.

**Novelty:** You may have to apply other pieces of equipment on the
child, for example, a earclip. If the child protests against the
earclip, it is not because of any significant pressure that it applies,
but because of the novel contact sensation on the skin. For the vast
majority of children, it might be annoying, but not painful. If you
distinguish between the majority of children with a normal and expected
reaction to novelty, and the minority with sensory sensitivity, you are
going to be able to offer specialty alternatives to the second group.

**Research EEG caps are very small and compact**: if you have never
worked with EEG before, this might sound very strange to you - certainly
research caps with 20 cables look bulky? In fact, EEG used in hospitals
for paediatrics are thrice as big, and connect to up to 300 electrodes
with as many cables - resulting in very heavy caps and very little
freedom of movement. In some cases, the patient is even tight to a
chin-rest.

Also, clinical EEGs require scrubbing the skin (that can bleed) and
gluing the electrodes. Sessions for the diagnosis of epilepsy can last
3-6 hours, are extremely tedious and sometimes require that the patient
sleeps with the cap on. Research EEG caps are lean and simple in
comparison. If you feel anxious about using a research EEG, try to
visualise these other cumbersome systems - and feel the relief of having
to use a research system instead!

**Lastly, the EEG cap does not conduct electricity to the participant**:
it only records passively the very tiny electric current coming from the
participant's brain.

### No EEG no cry

**Children differ in personalities**: some may be vocal and take
initiative, some others may be shy and cautious. Culture plays a
significant role in individual differences: in some parts of the world,
children are not used to receiving explanations, and may feel confused
if you are too talkative, in some other parts, they are used to receive
structuring from the adults, and may feel upset if you do not engage
with them directly. You are the best judge of what is the local custom
with children, so try out different strategies that are compatible with
what you experience at home and at work.

**Some (or many) children will cry or whine when you cap them.** Make
peace with this realisation. When a child cries because of something
that we did, we feel awful: are we monsters? Shall we stop? Is it all
wrong and unnatural? But a child's cry has evolved thousands of years
exactly to trigger this kind of feeling - it is instinctive and it does
not mean that what you are doing is harmful. It is simply novel.
*Turning the tides and calming the child all depends if you let that cry
arouse your negative feelings.*

Just like you ignore turbulence on a plane, behave calmly to feel calm:
keep smiling, release your muscles, and focus on nice distracting things
(such as the cartoon playing, your colleague blowing bubbles etc).

**Fight against the fear that what we do may traumatise children**: this
is absolutely untrue - what we do with them is short and insignificant
and will simply leave no mark. *When the session is over, and the child
is free to go, rest assured that - even if they cried for half an hour -
they will forget about the whole experience and go on with their life.*
The same applies to when you had an absolute fantastic time with the
child: they will forget you, you are as meaningful as the entertainer
that they stayed with for half an hour while their parents shopped in
IKEA. Just observe them as they walk out the lab door, jumping or
running, not even turning to look at you, already in the future.

### The first rule about EEG club is you do not talk about EEG club

**No child loves a hat**: parents wanting to shield their child from the
sun or from the cold know that too well. Unfortunately, there is only
one way to really prevent a child that is not super obedient from
removing the EEG cap: **they need to forget about it**.

If you thought they had, but they still try to remove it at some point,
it means they tricked you: they acted like they were focusing on
something else, but had been waiting for a moment of your distraction
this whole time.

There are two ways (that I know) to make the child forget the cap:

1.  **Literally overwhelm them with distraction, entertainment and
    reward**

    > You will have to continuously interact with the child from start
    > to end and make them have the ***best*** time of their life. This
    > is difficult if the child was crying at the start, but not
    > impossible: you will need different toys, bubbles, stickers,
    > snacks, and a very soothing and likable attitude. When you obtain
    > the smallest smile from them, exaggerate and celebrate that little
    > smile to escalate it into a laugh.

2.  **Make them so comfy and cozy and bored that they almost fall
    asleep**

    > To bore the child and make them half asleep, you must provide a
    > sitting position that is extremely comfortable. This might not be
    > easily available: when we focus on cables and screens, or try to
    > replicate a setting that is always the same (for example, from
    > another study), we end up with parent and child sitting stiffly
    > and uncomfortably.
    >
    > You might want to investigate: almost every EEG study involves a
    > screen, and often parents use screens to make the child sleep. Can
    > you ask the parents how they put the child to sit when they watch
    > a screen? And if the child is not allowed/not exposed to screens,
    > what is the position they sit when they are doing another
    > comfortable activity, such as reading a story?
    >
    > Asking the parent to hold the child in their arms and even rock
    > them can also work, or using a baby car sit that blocks external
    > stimulation.
    >
    > Finally, you want the environment around them to be extremely
    > calm - including yourself: move smoothly and slowly, talk quietly,
    > literally whisper instead of talking.

### What if I am still nervous?

**Take a walk or have a break.**

During my first year of testing, I always used to go for a brief walk
before the parent arrived. If you cannot take a walk, have a brief
break: stop any work you are doing 15 minutes earlier and drink a cup of
tea. If you are testing in the morning, arrive early so that you can
relax 10-15 minutes after your commute.

**Have all the equipment lined up and ready**.

Go to the testing room early, even hours before if you are doing a long
composite session, and check that everything is in place for you to use.
For example you can pre-fill syringes with gel, take two or three caps
of different measures out of the drawer, put battery-operated equipment
to charge (just in case, and it won't hurt). You can even switch on the
laptop, set up software, try out the equipment already. There is no
better antidote to anxiety than practice, knowledge and routine.

**Repeat to yourself that there is no way you can harm the child, and
that what you are doing is actually pretty cool.**

Even for the parent and the child, it must be quite exciting and novel.
Not many people without neurological conditions have the chance to do
EEG. That surprised expression on their face can quickly turn into
curiosity - play with that, encourage them to ask questions and share
your thoughts about what you find exciting about the study!

### What if the parent is nervous?

**The parent will be calm if you are calm**. If you are both calm, there
is a very high chance that the child will be calm too.

**Parents are great at understanding body language**: if you are
frustrated or stressed, they will know - and since they do not know
about that cable or that line of code that is troubling you, they will
simply assume that something is wrong. You must avoid to create that
impression.

**Just repeat to yourself: whatever happens, a cable or a line of code
does not work, it doesn't really matter.** What is the worst thing that
can happen? One dataset less collected. It is not a big deal like
breaking expensive equipment forever or having an accident. The parent
does not know about sample sizes and will not really care as long as
everything is fine.

**Chat with the parents before/during/after capping**. Small talk makes
(most) people comfortable. If you notice that the parent is a little
nervous, try to put them at ease and diverge their attention beyond the
EEG: ask them anything about their travel, how was their week, if they
have anything fun planned ahead (of course use topics that are
appropriate to your cultural context). While you chat, the child may
observe you while interacting with their carer and become more
accustomed to you.

**Always act like and tell them that their child is doing a good job**.
Even if the child has not looked at the screen for a second, they still
came all the way to the lab and sat in a room with you for quite some
time. That counts as good performance. If the parent fells disappointed,
tell them that not being engaged with the task is expected and that you
will use every tiny second of data that the child graciously allowed you
to record.

**If the parents express the concern that the equipment may harm the
child, be ready to share your knowledge and to show that you are 100%
sure that it is absolutely harmless.** Be exhaustive: even in simple
words, share details about the facts that support your statements.
Explain to the parent how the EEG works and that hundreds of children in
many countries have done EEG before with those same stimuli. You can
show them the study manuals, that usually contains screenshots of the
stimuli. Take some time during and after testing to comment on the tasks
with them and ask what they are thinking.
