---
title: Adapting Testing to the Cultural Context
linktitle: Adapting to Cultural Context
summary: Examples of adjustments in four countries
date: 2022-05-08
type: book
weight: 3
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
image:
  caption: ''
  focal_point: ''
  preview_only: no
---

**Disclaimer: as I stressed in the premise, there is not one rule that
works everywhere.** Specific examples can inspire people that are
testing in the countries I refer to below, or in similar conditions,
however, three on four of the settings where I have tested were
high-income, and all of them were urban and centered around a University
- not a very good representation of the real big world.

**So, what I really mean with the below examples is to show the extent
of adaptation and flexibility that is needed to test successfully in
different settings**. If anybody gave a rule book for testing, always
keep in mind that there is no universal behaviour that will work with
participants across settings.

**The best sources of knowledge are your observational skills, and
inputs from local people.** I had to learn it the hard way, just as
everyone else.

## Italy (Rovereto, Trentino Alto Adige)

I have tested with eye-tracking in Italy during the first and third year
of my PhD, with children aged 2 to 5, and teenagers. Also, I am Italian
(born and raised). The premises of testing in Italy have not been the
easiest in my experience, as I have found that Italian parents are
somewhat anxious about children, and that interactions between children
and adults that are not part of the family/supposed to take care of them
professionally are infrequent, even pre-Covid.

Additionally, the research culture in Italy is limited compared to other
countries, and it is seen as something medical/ pathologising. I will
always remember my mum telling me that, when I was an infant, some
researcher called her from the hospital, asking if she would go in to
participate in a research study with me.

> "Can you imagine, going all the way and walking into the hospital with
> a baby? I said no!"

She was still aghast by just recalling that memory, after almost 30
years. Of course, I was already a researcher when she told me that
story, calling and emailing parents in the hope that they would think
differently than her. But I think that her reaction was pretty typical
and can be often encountered when researching in Italy even 30 years
later.

So, testing in Italy is not just a matter of figuring out how to do the
science, but it includes convincing parents that a researcher is
actually a person, and that research has nothing to worry about.

At the center where I was working, I would recruit the parents on their
way in/out of activity sessions that their children attended - so just
like "*Hello! I am the resident PhD student here, do you have five
minutes to listen to what I am doing*?". Then, I would basically spend
as much time as needed chatting with them, getting to know them before
even getting to the research.

Often, this phase worked also as a sort of acclimatization for their
child, that was maybe sitting on their lap or playing in close
proximity. As I said before, children in Italy are not accustomed to
interactions with strangers so it would have been unnatural to address
them directly or immediately make eye-contact. I would only talk to the
parent, while the child observed me out of the corner of their eye:
that's how the proper first interaction with a stranger happens in
Italy, and how the parent-child dyad gets to accept you.

Even if the child accepted me and initiated an interaction, I would
always alternate gaze between child and parent as the parent is always
part of the interaction (even if passive).

If this first interaction went well, often the parent and child would
stay for another 30 minutes to do the study immediately so that they did
not have to come back - so I also had to be up and ready to go!

## Sweden (Uppsala)

I have tested in Sweden during the second year of my PhD with
eye-tracking and EEG with infants aged 5 to 12 months.

I found that Swedish parents were relaxed and generally demonstrated
interest in research. On my first day of testing, I was actually shocked
because one parent gave me their baby to hold one second after they had
met me, and ran to the toilet. If not giving you their child to hold as
a first thing, they often put him on the ground to freely explore, so I
would always be ready to take the child into my arms, and scan the
carpet for small pieces of things to avoid that they picked it up and
put it in their mouth.

The good mood of the session depended a lot on the baby feeling like
they were free to explore and owned the space. If I noticed that the
child was nervous, I would spend some time exploring the room with them,
holding them and/or walking around and bringing interesting objects to
their attention.

## United Kingdom (London)

I have tested eye-tracking and EEG in London during the third year of my
PhD, and as a postdoc.

Parents in the UK are similar to Swedish parents, but a little less
friendly to you. Children do like to be the center of the attention, so
it would work well to kneel down when they enter, and greet them
face-to-face.

Parents very confidently put the child on the ground and let them freely
explore; I would sit with the child on the ground and play with them,
and make all the session extremely playful. Children responded very well
to rewards, especially stickers, with which they are obsessed (I think
because teachers use them at nursery school as rewards?).

## South Africa (Cape Town)

I tested with eye-tracking and EEG in Cape Town as a postdoc.

I had the impression that parents saw research as a sort of medical
thing, like "better with than without". So they expected their children
to listen to me (!) and sit still. They would even try to be useful so
that I could do what I had to do, and give me hints on how to handle
their child at best (for example, they would warn me if they were
hungry, or sleepy, or afraid of syringes).

Children would generally be still until the parent was in the room, but
would then be easily distracted and uninterested when they left. A way
that I found to work was to engage them to the screen with toys. For
example, I would drive a toy red car all over the screen to get them to
look at it, or place a doll next to them and pretend that she was
watching.
